
      
      Endometriosis is the second most common benign female genital disease after uterine myoma. This review discusses the interdisciplinary approach to the treatment of deep infiltrating endometriosis. Endometriosis has been defined as the presence of endometrial glands and stroma outside the internal epithelial lining of the cavum uteri. As a consequence, endometriosis can cause a wide range of symptoms such as chronic pelvic pain, subfertility, dysmenorrhea, deep dyspareunia, cyclical bowel or bladder symptoms (e.g., dyschezia, bloating, constipation, rectal bleeding, diarrhoea and hematuria), abnormal menstrual bleeding, chronic fatigue or low back pain. Approx. 50 % of teenagers and up to 32 % of women of reproductive age, operated for chronic pelvic pain or dysmenorrhoea, suffer from endometriosis. The time interval between the first unspecific symptoms and the medical diagnosis of endometriosis is about 7 years. This is caused not only by the non-specific nature of the symptoms but also by the frequent lack of awareness on the part of the cooperating disciplines with which the patients have first contact. As the pathogenesis of endometriosis is not clearly understood, a causal treatment is still impossible. Treatment options include expectant management, analgesia, hormonal medical therapy, surgical intervention and the combination of medical treatment before and/or after surgery. The correct treatment for each patient should take into account the severity of the disease and whether the patient desires to have children. The treatment should be as radical as necessary and as minimal as possible. The recurrence rate among treated patients lies between 5 and > 60 % and is very much dependent on the integrated management and surgical skills of the respective hospital. Consequently, to optimise the individual patient's treatment, a high degree of interdisciplinary cooperation in diagnosis and treatment is crucial and should, especially in the case of deep infiltrating endometriosis, be undertaken in appropriate centres.
    